



WG Working Group                                              S. Salsano
Internet-Draft                          Univ. of Rome Tor Vergata / CNIT
Intended status: Informational                              H. ElBakoury
Expires: 21 November 2022                                     Consultant
                                                             20 May 2022


     Extensible In-band Processing (EIP) Architecture and Framework
                         draft-eip-arch-latest

Abstract

   Extensible In-band Processing (EIP) extends the functionality of the
   IPv6 protocol considering the needs of future Internet services / 6G
   networks.  This document discusses the architecture and framework of
   EIP.  Two separate documents respectively analyze a number of use
   cases for EIP and provide the protocol specifications of EIP.

About This Document

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   The latest revision of this draft can be found at https://eip-
   home.github.io/eip-headers/draft-eip-arch.html.  Status information
   for this document may be found at https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/
   draft-eip-arch/.

   Discussion of this document takes place on the EIP SIG mailing list
   (mailto:eip@cnit.it), which is archived at http://postino.cnit.it/
   cgi-bin/mailman/private/eip/.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/eip-home/eip-arch.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 21 November 2022.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2022 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
     1.1.  Networking architecture evolution
       1.1.1.  Solutions above the layer 3
       1.1.2.  Clean slate revolution
       1.1.3.  Evolutionary solutions
   2.  Basic principles for EIP
   3.  Benefits of a common EIP header for multiple use cases.
   4.  Conventions and Definitions
   5.  Security Considerations
   6.  IANA Considerations
   7.  References
     7.1.  Normative References
     7.2.  Informative References
   Acknowledgments
   Authors' Addresses

1.  Introduction

   Networking architectures need to evolve to support the needs of
   future Internet services and 6G networks.  The networking research
   and standardization communities are considering different approaches
   for this evolution, we can broadly classify them in 3 different
   categories:

   1.  Clean slate and "revolutionary" solutions.  Throw away the legacy
       networking layer (IP).

   2.  Solutions above the layer 3.  Do not touch the legacy networking
       layer (IP).

   3.  Evolutionary solution.  Improve the IP layer (and try to preserve
       backward compatibility).

   The proposed EIP (Extensible In-band Processing) solution belongs to
   the third category, it extends the current IPv6 architecture without
   requiring a clean-slate revolution.

   The use cases for EIP are discussed in [id-eip-use-cases].  The
   specification of the EIP header format is provided in
   [id-eip-headers].

   In the next subsection we will briefly mentions some solutions
   belonging to the three categories and in particular we will show how
   the "evolutionary" trend has already started and is progressing at a
   strong pace, for example with the SRv6 "Network Programming Model"
   and with the "In-band Telemetry".

1.1.  Networking architecture evolution

1.1.1.  Solutions above the layer 3

1.1.2.  Clean slate revolution

1.1.3.  Evolutionary solutions

   and the SRv6 Programming Model

2.  Basic principles for EIP

   The design the IP networking layer has been strongly influenced by
   the so called "end-to-end" concept, which prescribed putting
   "complex" functions in the IP hosts and "simple" functions in network
   forwarding devices (IP routers).  Network operators have been used
   additional layers (e.g.  ATM and then MPLS) to put the "complex"
   functions that are needed to run operators networks (backbones and
   access networks).  We can also mention that in the real world, the
   end-to-end concept has been often disregarded with the introduction
   of middleboxes devices like NATs, TCP accelerators, but this has been
   seen as an unavoidable "mistake" and a problem.

   Recently we observe a clear trend in extending the functionality of
   the IP networking layer, going beyond the plain packet forwarding.
   An example of this trend is the rise of the SRv6 "network
   programming" model.  With the SRv6 network programming models, the
   routers can implement "complex" functionalities and they can be
   controlled by a "network program" that is embedded in IPv6 packet
   headers.  The operators can find all the needed functionality in the
   IPv6/SRv6 dataplane with no need of middleboxes nor of a separate
   MPLS layer.  Another example is the INT (IN band Telemetry) solution
   for monitoring.

   We believe that this trend is fundamental for the future proof
   evolution of networking architectures and it should be pursued
   further.  We envisage a feature-rich, extensible and programmable
   IPv6 networking layer, in which the intelligence is distributed
   across end-hosts, routers, virtual functions, servers in datacenters
   so that services can be implemented in the smartest and more
   efficient way.

   *  Both end nodes and routers can read/write EIP information

   *  Limited domain applicability

   *  Tunneling concept

   *  Edge to edge, edge to server-end

   *  EIP header

3.  Benefits of a common EIP header for multiple use cases.

   The EIP header will carry different EIP Information Elements that are
   defined to support the different use cases.  There are reasons why it
   is beneficial to define a common EIP header that support multiple use
   cases.

   1.  The number of available Option Types in HBH header is limited,
       likewise the number of available TLVs in the Segment Routing
       Header (SRH) is limited.  Defining multiple Option Types or SRH
       TLVs for multiple use case is not scalable and puts pressure on
       the allocation of such codepoints.

   2.  The definition and standardization of specific EIP Information
       Elements for the different use cases is much simpler, rather than
       requiring the definition of a new Option Type or SRH TLVs.

   3.  Different use cases may share the EIP Information Elements.

   4.  Efficient and "Hardware Friendly" mechanisms can be defined when
       the different EIP Information Elements are carried inside the
       same EIP header.

4.  Conventions and Definitions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

5.  Security Considerations

   TODO Security

6.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.

7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174>.

7.2.  Informative References

   [id-eip-headers]
              Salsano, S. and H. ElBakoury, "Extensible In-band
              Processing (EIP) Headers Definitions", 2022, <https://eip-
              home.github.io/eip-headers/draft-eip-headers-
              definitions.txt>.

   [id-eip-use-cases]
              Salsano, S. and H. ElBakoury, "Extensible In-band
              Processing (EIP) Use Cases", 2022, <https://eip-
              home.github.io/eip-headers/draft-eip-use-cases.txt>.

Acknowledgments

   TODO acknowledge.

Authors' Addresses

   Stefano Salsano
   Univ. of Rome Tor Vergata / CNIT
   Email: stefano.salsano@uniroma2.it


   Hesham ElBakoury
   Consultant
   Email: helbakoury@gmail.com
